# Population Health Management

In this post I will present a Population Health Management Report using HCUP's in-patient data from hospitals. With the healthcare spending crossing $3.5 trillion and accounting for 17.9 percent of the Gross Domestic Product, there is an urgent need to bring down costs and improve outcomes. Population Health Management is an important tool that is increasingly being used by health care providers to manage and control the escalating costs. The crux of Population Health Management is to use data to improve health outcomes. Tracking, monitoring and bench marking are the three bastions of Population Health Management, aimed at improving clinical and health outcomes while managing and reducing cost.
 

Be leveraging heath data, Population Health Management can align patient needs with what healthcare systems provide. Howver in order to truly do PHM we need comprehensive health data. Health data that provides a complete view of a patient’s care throughout their entire patient care experience. Unfortunately health data is fragmanted between claims data, clinical data, prescription drug data etc. making it difficult to aggregate into a cohesive view of the care provided, a key to improve the quality of care. 

Hospital care accounts for 33% of the nation's health dollar spending. By analyzing the patient population to gain insight into its socioeconomic constitution, demographics, and overall medical condition across geospatial regions, health care providers can better understand the quality of care being provided and identify areas for improvement and cost savings.

For this PHM report, I will be leveraging clinical and socioeconomic in-patient data generated by the hospitals. Hospitals can use these reports to optimize care management systems and focus their clinical resources on patients with more urgent need. Understanding the communities they serve through population health reporting can help hospitals transition from fee-for-service payments to value-based care while reducing costs and providing better care. 

I have created a Population Health report using in-patient data from hospitals from HCUP. Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) is a group of healthcare databases that contain the largest collection of longitudinal hospital care data in the United States. HCUP captures information extracted from administrative data (billing records) after a patient is discharged from the hospital, and it contains clinical and nonclinical information on all patients regardless of payer. The schema includes socioeconomic demographic data such as age, gender, income, zip code, payer type, information on admission and discharge, various diagnosis, procedures, charges, a total of about 600 columns.
If you were to purchase HCUP data say for your state you can use this analysis and create the Population Health Report that I will demo for your data.
A population health report helps the health care providers gain insight into the population they serve and get actionable intelligence. It sheds light on the quality of care being provided and allows monitoring and bench-marking of critical metrics. Using Power BI- I have created some example reports showing the types of summarization and tracking we can do with this kind of data. Some of the reports that I have created are described below. ..name all of them..I will show all these reports to you.

##Patient Stats

media/phm2.PNG

##Health Stats
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/shaheeng/PopulationHealthManagement/master/media/phm3.PNG

##Length of stay report

media/phm4.PNG

##Cost report

media/phm5.PNG 
##Intervention Profile



##Readmission Tracking

